# 48

It seems that the Latin races are far more deeply attached to their [Catholicism](catholicism.md) than we Northerners are to [Christianity](christianity.md) generally, and that consequently unbelief in Catholic countries means something quite different from what it does among Protestants---namely, a sort of revolt against the spirit of the race, while with us it is rather a return to the spirit (or non-spirit) of the race.

We Northerners undoubtedly derive our origin from barbarous races, even as regards our talents for religion---we have *poor* talents for it. One may make an exception in the case of the Celts, who have theretofore furnished also the best soil for Christian infection in the North: the Christian ideal blossomed forth in France as much as ever the pale sun of the north would allow it. How strangely pious for our taste are still these later French skeptics, whenever there is any Celtic blood in their origin! How Catholic, how un-German does [Auguste Comte](auguste-comte.md)'s Sociology seem to us, with the Roman logic of its instincts! How Jesuitical, that amiable and shrewd cicerone of Port Royal, [Sainte-Beuve](sainte-beuve.md), in spite of all his hostility to Jesuits! And even [Ernest Renan](ernest-renan.md): how inaccessible to us Northerners does the language of such a Renan appear, in whom every instant the merest touch of religious thrill throws his refined voluptuous and comfortably couching soul off its balance! Let us repeat after him these fine sentences---and what wickedness and haughtiness is immediately aroused by way of answer in our probably less beautiful but harder souls, that is to say, in our more German souls!---"*Disons donc hardiment que la religion est un produit de l'homme normal, que l'homme est le plus dans le vrai quant il est le plus religieux et le plus assuré d'une destinée infinie. ... C'est quand il est bon qu'il veut que la virtu corresponde à un order éternal, c'est quand il contemple les choses d'une manière désintéressee qu'il trouve la mort révoltante et absurde. Comment ne pas supposer que c'est dans ces moments-là, que l'homme voit le mieux?*" ... These sentences are so extremely *antipodal* to my ears and habits of thought, that in my first impulse of rage on finding them, I wrote on the margin, "*La niaiserie religieuse par excellence!*"---until in my later rage I even took a fancy to them, these sentences with their truth absolutely inverted! It is so nice and such a distinction to have one's own antipodes!
