# 24

*O sancta simplicitiatas!* In what strange simplification and falsification man lives! One can never cease wondering when once one has got eyes for beholding this marvel! How we have made everything around us clear and free and easy and simple! how we have been able to give our senses a passport to everything superficial, our thoughts a godlike desire for wanton pranks and wrong inferences!---how from the beginning, we have contrived to retain our ignorance in order to enjoy an almost inconceivable freedom, thoughtlessness, imprudence, heartiness, and gaiety---in order to enjoy life! And only on this solidified, granite-like foundation of ignorance could knowledge rear itself hitherto, the [Will to knowledge](will-to-knowledge.md) on the foundation of a far more powerful will, the [Will to ignorance](will-to-ignorance.md), to the uncertain, to the untrue! Not as its opposite, but---as its refinement! It is to be hoped, indeed, that *[Language](language.md)*, here as elsewhere, will not get over its awkwardness, and that it will continue to talk of opposites where there are only degrees and many refinements of gradation; it is equally to be hoped that the incarnated Tartuffery of morals, which now belongs to our unconquerable "flesh and blood," will turn the words round in the mouths of us discerning ones. Here and there we understand it, and laugh at the way in which precisely the best knowledge seeks most to retain us in this *simplified*, thoroughly artificial, suitably imagined, and suitably falsified world: at the way in which, whether it will or not, it loves error, because, as living itself, it loves life!
