# 232

[Woman](woman.md) wishes to be independent, and therefore she begins to enlighten men about "woman as she is"---*this* is one of the worst developments of the general *uglifying* of Europe. For what must these clumsy attempts of feminine scientificality and self-exposure bring to light! Woman has so much cause for shame; in woman there is so much pedantry, superficiality, schoolmasterliness, petty presumption, unbridledness, and indiscretion concealed---study only woman's behaviour towards children!---which has really been best restrained and dominated hitherto by the *fear* of man. Alas, if ever the "eternally tedious in woman"---she has plenty of it!---is allowed to venture forth! if she begins radically and on principle to unlearn her wisdom and art---of charming, of playing, of frightening away sorrow, of alleviating and taking easily; if she forgets her delicate aptitude for agreeable desires! Female voices are already raised, which, by Saint [Aristophanes](aristophanes.md)! make one afraid:---with medical explicitness it is stated in a threatening manner what woman first and last *requires* from man. Is it not in the very worst taste that woman thus sets herself up to be scientific? [Enlightenment](enlightenment.md) hitherto has fortunately been men's affair, men's gift---we remained therewith "among ourselves"; and in the end, in view of all that women write about "woman," we may well have considerable doubt as to whether woman really *desires* enlightenment about herself---and *can* desire it. If woman does not thereby seek a new *ornament* for herself---I believe ornamentation belongs to the eternally feminine?---why, then, she wishes to make herself feared: perhaps she thereby wishes to get the mastery. But she does not want [Truth](truth.md)---what does woman care for truth? From the very first, nothing is more foreign, more repugnant, or more hostile to woman than truth---her great art is falsehood, her chief concern is appearance and beauty. Let us confess it, we men: we honour and love this very art and this very instinct in woman: we who have the hard task, and for our recreation gladly seek the company of beings under whose hands, glances, and delicate follies, our seriousness, our gravity, and profundity appear almost like follies to us. Finally, I ask the question: Did a woman herself ever acknowledge profundity in a woman's mind, or justice in a woman's heart? And is it not true that on the whole "woman" has hitherto been most despised by woman herself, and not at all by us?---We men desire that woman should not continue to compromise herself by enlightening us; just as it was man's care and the consideration for woman, when the church decreed: *mulier taceat in ecclesia.* It was to the benefit of woman when [Napoleon](napoleon.md) gave the too eloquent [Madame de Stael](madame-de-stael.md) to understand: *mulier taceat in politicis!*---and in my opinion, he is a true friend of woman who calls out to women today: *mulier taceat de muliere*!
